Restructuring Expressions (#697)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/queries/concepts.adoc

[[core-concepts]]
= Core concepts
:description: this page describes the three fundamental concepts of a Cypher query: nodes, relationships, and patterns.

Fundamentally, a Neo4j graph database consists of three core entities: nodes, relationships, and patterns.
Cypher queries are constructed to either match or create these entities in a graph.
Having a basic understanding of what nodes, relationships, and patterns are in a graph is therefore crucial in order to construct Cypher queries.

The below examples use the xref:clauses/match.adoc[] and xref:clauses/return.adoc[] clauses to find and return the desired graph patterns.
To learn more about these and many other Cypher clauses, see the section on xref:clauses/index.adoc[].

[[core-concepts-nodes]]
== Nodes

> The data entities in a Neo4j knowledge graph are called nodes.

Reviewer: I'm a bit put off by the usage of `knowledge graph` without prior mention. Shall I assume it is synonym to `graph database`, as it is referred to in the first paragraph, or are there differences I should be aware of?

Author: Agreed - this is unnecessary. Will change to "graph database"

Nodes are referred to in Cypher using parenthesis `()`.

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (n:Person {name:'Anna'})
RETURN n.born AS birthYear
----

In the above example, the node includes the following:

* A `Person` *label*.

> A node may have none, one, or several node labels, and they are used as tags to enable the retrieval of specific data entities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Labels are like tags, and are used to query the database for specific nodes. A node may have multiple labels, for example `Person` and `Actor`.
```

> enable the retrieval of specific data entities

this sounded exceedingly convoluted to me.

The rewording also avoids drawing attention to how many labels a node may have -- in particular, I don't think we should mention it can have 0 labels. You sure _can_, but there's no use case for which you _should_, so I wouldn't even bring it up.

Author: Fine - I really like labelless nodes myself, but I see what you mean.

* A `name` *property* set to `Anna`.

> Properties are defined within curly braces, `{}`, and are used to provide nodes with specific information, which can then also be matched for and further improve the ability to retrieve data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Properties are defined within curly braces, `{}`, and are used to provide nodes with specific information, which can also be queried for and further improve the ability to pinpoint data.
```
to avoid using a clause verb that we haven't described yet

* A *variable*, `n`.

> Variables are used to bind specified nodes in order that they may be retrieved in subsequent clauses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Variables allow to reference specified nodes in subsequent clauses.
```

In this example, the first `MATCH` clause finds all `Person` nodes in the graph with the `name` property set to `Anna`, and binds them to the variable `n`.

> The variable `n` is then passed along to the subsequent `RETURN` clause, which returns the value of a different property (`born`) belonging to the same bound node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The variable `n` is then passed along to the subsequent `RETURN` clause, which returns the value of a different property (`born`) belonging to the same node.
```

[[core-concepts-relationships]]
== Relationships

Nodes in a graph can be connected with relationships.

> A relationship must have a start node, an end node, and exactly one relationship type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A relationship must have a start node, an end node, and exactly one type.
```

> Relationships are represented in Cypher with dashes (`-`) and arrows (e.g. `-->`) indicating the direction of a relationship.

Reviewer: I'm unsure whether we should mention dashes (you're thinking about undirected relationships, I assume?) Since the example shows a directed relationship, and the section is quite short, the dashes are left unexplained, which ends up being more confusing than helpful.

Author: Again, I'm a fan of directionless relationships, and again, I see your point.

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (:Person {name: 'Anna'})-[r:KNOWS WHERE r.since < 2020]->(friend:Person)
RETURN count(friend) As numberOfFriends
----

> Unlike nodes, information within a relationship pattern must be enclosed by square brackets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike nodes, information for a relationship must be enclosed by square brackets.
```
Mostly because 3 lines below there is a section called `Patterns`, and I'd be put off by reading about `relationships patterns` and `pattens`, and wondering how the 2 would relate.

Author: "information for a relationship" sounds strange to me, though. Will think of a different wording.

> In this case, all outgoing relationships from the start node must be of the type `KNOWS` and have the property `since` set to less than `2020`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The query example above matches for relationships of type `KNOWS` and with the property `since` set to less than `2020`.
The query also requires the relationships to go from a `Person` node named `Anna` to any other `Person` nodes, referred to as `friend`.
```

> The xref:functions/aggregating.adoc#functions-count[count()] aggregate function is used in the `RETURN` clause to count all nodes bound by the `friend` variable in the preceding `MATCH` clause (i.e. how many friends Anna has known since before 2020).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The xref:functions/aggregating.adoc#functions-count[count()] function is used in the `RETURN` clause to count all nodes bound by the `friend` variable in the preceding `MATCH` clause (i.e. how many friends Anna has known since before 2020).
```
At this stage I don't think it matters that it is an _aggregating_ function -- it's just another word the reader is unlikely to know.

Author: But if they don't know, now they know.
(I agree, though - will remove)

Note that while nodes can have several labels, relationships can only have one type.

[[core-concepts-patterns]]
== Patterns

Graph patterns consists of nodes and relationships.
Exploring these graph patterns sits at the very core of Cypher.

> By applying a declarative path pattern in a query, you can find simple or complex patterns of fixed or varied lengths.

Reviewer: I think this whole sentence should go away. Beside the fact that I think a _pattern_ is by itself _declarative_, the sentence to me reads like "By using patterns in a query, you can find simple or complex patterns!". I usually throw away any sentence that tries to define an object (pattern) using that same object (pattern) as explanation.

With that said, I appreciate that patterns are tough to explain, and I don't have a better wording from the top of my head.

Reviewer: However, the section leaves me doubtful about the difference between `Relationship` and `Patterns`, because the examples in the two sections are identical in structure (match node-rel-node, return node). While I agree that it makes little sense to match relationships _alone_, it's also not straightforward at all from these examples how differently I should think of relationships and patterns. Again, I don't have a killer solution (maybe you do), but I can give it some thought.

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (n:Person {name: 'Anna'})-[:KNOWS]-{1,5}(friend:Person WHERE n.born < friend.born)

> RETURN DISTINCT friend.name AS youngerFriends

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RETURN DISTINCT friend.name AS youngerConnections
```
a bit of splitting hair, but with 5 degrees of separation you almost reach the queen of England, and it's not your friend :P

Author: A good monarch is a friend to all her people. But I see what you mean.

----

> This example uses a xref:patterns/concepts.adoc#quantified-relationships[quantified relationship] to find all paths of a specific length (between `1` and `5` "hops") traversing only relationships of type `KNOWS` from the start node `Anna` to other `Person` nodes with a lower `born` property (as defined by the xref:clauses/where.adoc[] clause).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example uses a xref:patterns/concepts.adoc#quantified-relationships[quantified relationship] to find all paths up to `5` _hops_ traversing only relationships of type `KNOWS` from the start node `Anna` to other younger `Person` nodes (as defined by the xref:clauses/where.adoc[] clause).
```
We use `hops` close to its literal sense so I think we can afford to avoid quotes. Italic may be nice to mark that it has a somewhat specific use in graph dbs. But also, all this is splitting hair, so pick what you like. I personally like italic. However, I later noticed that there's many occurrences oh `"hops"` in the tutorial as well - just a reminder if you change it here (and I think it could also stay without any formatting, just hops).

I've also rephrased to say what result we get, rather than _reading out_ the query, for two reasons:

- it's usually more pedagogical to phrase one thing in multiple ways
- it was long and hard to follow all the way (this is potentially the 3rd cypher query I'm seeing in my life, at this point!)

Author: I think just hops is fine. Will change in the basic queries page as well.

> The xref:syntax/operators.adoc#syntax-using-the-distinct-operator[DISTINCT] operator is used to ensure that the `RETURN` clause only returns unique nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The xref:syntax/operators.adoc#syntax-using-the-distinct-operator[DISTINCT] operator is used to ensure that the `RETURN` clause only outputs unique nodes.
```
just to avoid repetition.

Author: outputs is not a nice word, though. The repetition is surely preferable.

Patterns can also be assigned variables.
For example, the below query binds a whole path pattern, which matches the xref:patterns/concepts.adoc#shortest-path[shortest path] from `Anna` to another `Person` node in the graph with the `nationality` property set to `Canadian`.

> In this case, the `RETURN` clause returns the full path pattern between the two nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, the `RETURN` clause outputs the full path pattern between the two nodes.
```

[source, cypher]
----

> MATCH p=shortestPath((:Person {name:'Anna'})-[:KNOWS*]-(:Person {nationality: 'Canadian'}))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MATCH p=shortestPath((:Person {name: 'Anna'})-[:KNOWS*..10]-(:Person {nationality: 'Canadian'}))
```
It's a bad practice to not limit the number of hops in a shortest path call -- the exploration grows exponentially very quickly, and if the graph has loops, it can get infinite.

:description: this page describes the three fundamental concepts of a Cypher query: nodes, relationships, and patterns.

[[core-concepts]]
= Core concepts

> Fundamentally, a Neo4j graph database consists of three core entities: nodes, relationships, and patterns.

Reviewer 2: Is a pattern considered an entity? (I might be confusing myself with what we mean by entities internally, so am curious :D )

Author: I believe that is correct - but I will double check :)

Reviewer: I don't have a formal definition of entity, but I tend to think of them as of the _type of objects_ a query can return: values/properties, nodes, relationships, paths. Another way for me to think about that would be the things I can assign a variable to. Does this match your intuition/definition @gem-neo4j ?

Reviewer 2: Well technically paths are returned, not patterns, and that has been my main hang up :)

Reviewer: It was an awkward conversation I had with Jens where we talked about paths/patterns, until I realized that in my mind I had read `paths` in that section all along :facepalm: so yeah, paths it will be.

Cypher queries are constructed to either match or create these entities in a graph.
Having a basic understanding of what nodes, relationships, and patterns are in a graph is therefore crucial in order to construct Cypher queries.

The below examples use the xref:clauses/match.adoc[] and xref:clauses/return.adoc[] clauses to find and return the desired graph patterns.
To learn more about these and many other Cypher clauses, see the section on xref:clauses/index.adoc[].

[[core-concepts-nodes]]
== Nodes

The data entities in a Neo4j knowledge graph are called nodes.

> Nodes are referred to in Cypher using brackets`()`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Nodes are referred to in Cypher using brackets `()`.
```

Should we not say parenthesis?

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (n:Person {name:'Anna'})
RETURN n.born AS birthYear
----

In the above example, the node includes the following:

* A `Person` *label*.
A node may have none, one, or several node labels, and they are used as tags to enable the retrieval of specific data entities.
* A `name` *property* set to `Anna`.

> Properties are defined within curly brackets, `{}`, and are used to provide nodes with specific information, which can then also be matched for and further improve the ability to retrieve data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Properties are defined within curly braces, `{}`, and are used to provide nodes with specific information, which can then also be matched for and further improve the ability to retrieve data.
```

In programming at least (maybe English too, not sure tbh):
() - parenthesis
[] - square brackets
{} - curly braces

* A *variable*, `n`.
Variables are used to bind specified nodes in order that they may be retrieved in subsequent clauses.

In this example, the first `MATCH` clause finds all `Person` nodes in the graph with the `name` property set to `Anna`, and binds them to the variable `n`.
The variable `n` is then passed along to the subsequent `RETURN` clause, which returns the value of a different property (`born`) belonging to the same bound node.

[[core-concepts-relationships]]
== Relationships

Nodes in a graph can be connected with relationships.

> A relationship must have a start node and an end node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A relationship must have a start node and an end node and one relationship type.
A relationship type, is similar to a node label, however, relationships can only be defined with at least and most one type.
```

Or something similar, I think it is nice to add that as a symmetry to the node section :)

Reviewer 2: Oh I see later on this is mentioned, but maybe that could be moved here?

> Relationships are represented in Cypher with dashes (`-`) and arrows (e.g. `-->`) indicating the direction of a relationship.

Reviewer 2: (e.g. `-->`) this renders funny ion the website btw

[source, cypher]
----

> MATCH (n:Person {name: 'Anna'})-[r:KNOWS {since < 2020}]->(friend:Person})

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
MATCH (:Person {name: 'Anna'})-[:KNOWS {since < 2020}]->(friend:Person})
```

RETURN count(friend) As numberOfFriends
----

Unlike nodes, information within a relationship pattern must be enclosed by square brackets.
In this case, all outgoing relationships from the start node must be of the type `KNOWS` and have the property `since` set to less than `2020`.

> The xref:functions/aggregating.adoc#functions-count[count()] function is used in the `RETURN` clause to count all nodes bound by the `friend` variable in the preceding `MATCH` clause (i.e. how many friends Anna has known since before 2020).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The xref:functions/aggregating.adoc#functions-count[count()] aggregate function is used in the `RETURN` clause to count all nodes bound by the `friend` variable in the preceding `MATCH` clause (i.e. how many friends Anna has known since before 2020).
```

Note that while nodes can have several labels, relationships can only have one type.

[[core-concepts-patterns]]
== Patterns

Graph patterns consists of nodes and relationships.
Exploring these graph patterns sits at the very core of Cypher.
By applying a declarative path pattern in a query, you can find simple or complex patterns of fixed or varied lengths.

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (n:Person {name: 'Anna'})-[:KNOWS]-{1,5}(friends:Person WHERE n.born < friends.born)

> RETURN DISTINCT friends.name AS youngerFriends

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
MATCH (n:Person {name: 'Anna'})-[:KNOWS]-{1,5}(friend:Person WHERE n.born < friend.born)
RETURN DISTINCT friend.name AS youngerFriends
```

----

> This example uses a xref:patterns/concepts.adoc#quantified-relationships[quantified relationship] to find all paths of a specific length (between `1` and `5` 'hops') traversing only relationships of type `KNOWS` from the start node `Anna` to other `Person` nodes with a lower `born` property (as defined by the xref:clauses/where.adoc[] clause).

Reviewer 2: hops is written with double quotes on a different page, I don't mind which, but think consistency is nice

The xref:syntax/operators.adoc#syntax-using-the-distinct-operator[DISTINCT] operator is used to ensure that the `RETURN` clause only returns unique nodes.

Patterns can also be assigned variables.
For example, the below query binds a whole path pattern, which matches the xref:patterns/concepts.adoc#shortest-path[shortest path] from `Anna` to another `Person` node in the graph with the `nationality` property set to `Canadian`.
In this case, the `RETURN` clause returns the full path pattern between the two nodes.

[source, cypher]
----

> MATCH p = shortestPath((n:Person {name:'Anna'})-[:KNOWS*]-(canadian:Person {nationality: 'Canadian'}))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
MATCH p = shortestPath((:Person {name:'Anna'})-[:KNOWS*]-(:Person {nationality: 'Canadian'}))
```
